Running deployments of addons agents outside managed cluster (#65)
open-cluster-management-io/enhancements: enhancements/sig-architecture/63-hosted-addon/README.md

# Running addons agents outside of the managed cluster

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in 
[website](https://github.com/open-cluster-management-io/open-cluster-management-io.github.io/)

## Summary

This proposal is for the addon framework to support running addons agents outside of the managed cluster.

## Motivation

Currently, all addons agents should be deployed on the managed cluster, it is mandatory to expose the hub cluster to 
the managed cluster even if the managed cluster resides in an insecure environment.

The proposal [hosted-deploy-mode](./../33-hosted-deploy-mode/README.md) introduced a new deploy mode `Hosted` to deploy 
klusterlet outside of the managed cluster, but keeps the addons agents remaining on the managed cluster, this proposal 
makes the addon framework support running addons agents outside of the managed cluster, which is defined as `Hosted` 

> mode deploy for addons agents.

Reviewer: we should clarify what hosted mode is. hosted cluster is a managedcluster of the hub, which is to host the agent to manage another managedcluster, is this correct?

specify which manifests need to be deployed outside the managed cluster.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a managed cluster administrator, I hope as few as possible workloads running in my cluster while the addon 
functionality is not affected.

#### Story 2

As a hub cluster administrator, on the premise that the addon functionality is not affected, I do not want the addon 
agent to talk to the hub cluster directly. 

### Terms

- `Hosted` mode: deploy addons agents deployments outside the managed cluster.
- `Hosting cluster`: The cluster where the addons agents deployments runn.

### Constraints

There are several constraints:
- The managed cluster must be exposed to the hosting cluster
- The managed cluster(Klusterlet) must be imported to hub in `Hosted` mode
- The hosting cluster must be a managed cluster of the hub, hosting cluster should be managed by the hub
- The hosting cluster must be the same cluster where the managed cluster klusterlet(registration-agent & work-agent) 
runs
- After the addon is deployed, the deployment mode cannot be switched

## Design Details

### For addon developers

> We propose to add a label `addon.open-cluster-management.io/manifest-type` for the addon agent manifests to mark which 

Author: `addon.open-cluster-management.io/hosted-manifest-location` looks good, @qiujian16 What is your point?

> We propose to add a label `addon.open-cluster-management.io/manifest-type` for the addon agent manifests to mark which 

Reviewer: i think you only want to know whether the resource should be put on hosting or hosted. In that case, why do we need to care the value? You only need to care about the annotation key existence, right?

manifests should be deployed where in Hosted mode:

> - No matter in Default mode or Hosted mode, all manifests will be deployed on the managed cluster

Reviewer 2: From the table below, I think you mean "in Default mode, all manifests will be deployed on the managed cluster" (which preserves the way it currently works?)

- When the label does not exist or its value is `hosted-mode-managed`: the manifest will be deployed on the managed 
cluster in Hosted mode

> - When the label's value is `hosted-mode-hosting`: the manifest will be deployed on the hosting cluster in Hosted mode

Reviewer: this could be confusing, we should clarify what is hosting cluster and what is hosted cluster.

Author: yes, will add more explanation on the hosting cluster Term, and we do not use`hosted cluster` as a term in OCM to describe the hosted mode, instead we use `managed cluster`.

- When the label's value is `hosted-mode-none`: the manifest will not be deployed in Hosted mode

> <table class="tg">

Author: But it is not easy to describe with markdown

  <tr>
    <th class="tg-0pky" rowspan="2"><br>Label Value</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Default Mode</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow" colspan="2">Hosted Mode</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow" rowspan="2"><br>Example</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Managed Cluster</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Managed Cluster</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Hosting Cluster</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky"><span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal">nonexist | hosted-mode-managed</span></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">CRD owned by the addon</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky"><span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal">hosted-mode-hosting</span></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">deployment</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky"><span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal">hosted-mode-none</span></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### For addon deployers

> Once the managed cluster is imported to the hub in `Hosted` mode, we propose to add an annotation 

Reviewer 2: Is the annotation something that would be added automatically when the managedcluster is in Hosted mode? Or would this be specified by the user / another process when creating the ManagedClusterAddOn resource?

Author: The annotation will not be added automatically, it should be specified by the user / another process when creating the ManagedClusterAddOn resource. since even the managedcluster is in Hosted mode, the addon still can be in Default mode.

`addon.open-cluster-management.io/hosting-cluster-name` for `ManagedClusterAddon` to 
indicate the addon should be deployed in Hosted mode, and the value of the annotation is the hosting cluster which 
should:
- be a managed cluster of the hub as well

> - be the same cluster where the managed cluster klusterlet(registration-agent & work-agent) runs

Reviewer: what does this mean? I think you have a pre-requirement that the addon in hosted mode MUST run in a managedcluster where klusterlet is deployed using hosted mode. Also the hosting cluster of the klusterlet and addon must be the same, right?

#### How does the addon agent connect to the managed cluster?

Addon agents deployments will be deployed in the `{ManagedClusterAddon.Spec.InstallNamespace}` namespeace, and the 

> addon deployer is required to provide a secret, which name is `{addon-name}-managed-kubeconfig` and contains the key 

Reviewer: define what is addon deployer.

Author: @qiujian16 should we change the `{addon-name}-managed-kubeconfig` to `{addon-name}-spoke-kubeconfig`?

`kubeconfig` to connect to the managed cluster, in the `{ManagedClusterAddon.Spec.InstallNamespace}` namespace on the 
hosting cluster.

Some potential ways to provide the secret:
- The addon deployer asks the managed cluster administrator for a specific permission kubeconfig, then create it on the 
hosting cluster. Because the kubeconfig is generated by the managed cluster administrator, the addon developer does not 
need to deploy any service-account, role, rolebinding on the managed cluster, labels these resources 
`addon.open-cluster-management.io/manifest-type: hosted-mode-none`
- The addon developer deploys service-account, role, rolebinding on the managed cluster, labels these resources 
`addon.open-cluster-management.io/manifest-type: hosted-mode-managed`(or does not add this label, keep this label 
non-exist), then develops a component to get the service account on the remote managed cluster, and retrieve the token 

> back to the hosting cluster to generate a kubeconfig.

Reviewer 2: It seems like it would be very useful if this was done by the addon-framework (or it had functions to help with the process at least)

Author: Currently, I don't think there is a suitable component for this. This requires the component can connect to the managed cluster naturally and has access to get the service account secret back to the hosting cluster. It looks like only registration-agent and work-agent can meet the condition, but the feature is clearly not what they were designed for, the registration-agent is for registry a cluster/an addon to the HUB, and the work-agent is for applying manifestwork to a managed cluster.

       |       |                                                            |                                  
       |       | +---------------------+   +---------------------+          |                                  
       |       | |CRDs:                |   |Configurations:      |          |                                  
       |       | | clusterClaim        |   | role,rolebinding,sa |  etc.    |                                  
       |       | | appliedmanifestwork |   +----------^----------+          |                                  
       |       | +---------------------+              |                     |                                  
       |       +--------------------------------------|---------------------+                                  
       |                                              |                                                        
       |                                              |                                                        
       -----------------------------------------------|                                                        
```

> ### Guidance for transforming Default mode addon to hosted mode

Reviewer 2: This example/guide is very helpful. I think we had done some initial tests with the policy addon using this kind of volumeMount and kubeconfig arg, and it worked reasonably well.

Here are some guidelines for transforming addons, which are built with addon-framework in Default mode, to Hosted mode. 
After transforming, the addon should be deployed successfully either in Default mode or Hosted mode.

1. Consider carefully whether the addon can run in Hosted mode. Will addon functions be affected when addon agent is 
running outside the managed cluster? If the answer is no, stop.
2. Refactor the code of the addon agent to accept a flag like `managed-kubeconfig`, and use the kubeconfig received 

> with the flag to build the managed cluster kube client, and use this client to process resources on the managed cluster.

Reviewer: this should be different from the `local-kubeconfig` or `in-cluster kubeconfig` which is mainly used for leader election, and lease update. right?

Reviewer 2: Great point! If I remember right, the addon-framework usually uses a lease for addon health on the managed cluster. In Hosted mode, I think that would be on the hosting cluster? This is another place where the footprint on the managed cluster is reduced 👍 

But also, there is a backup way to put the lease on the hub cluster, in case the managed cluster doesn't support that API (eg openshift 3.11). Would that need to be considered here as well, for a potential 3 kubeconfigs? Or can we require the hosting cluster to support that API?

Author: yes, Great point. I think the lease should be on the hosting cluster.

5. Service account, (cluster)role, (cluster)rolebinding are a little special. In general, there is only one copy of 
these resources in default mode, but now we need to consider splitting them into two copies, one for the hosting 
cluster (permissions for running the controller, such as operating configmaps, leases, and events), and another for the 
managed cluster (permissions for the agent to operate the managed cluster resources)
6. Test the addon deploying and deleting in Hosted mode AND Default mode, make sure it can work on both mode. Default 
mode can be seen as a special Hosted mode when the managed cluster itself is treated as the hosting cluster.

### Test Plan

E2E tests can use kind to create two clusters to test, one cluster acts as hub and hosting cluster(self-join), and the 
other acts as the managed cluster, an example should be created using addon framework for the purpose of testing, and 
the addon agent deployment can be successfully installed on the hosting cluster.

### Graduation Criteria

Alpha:
* Hosted mode addon is implemented and works well on KinD cluster for at least one addon
* E2E tests exists

## Alternatives

> 1. Change the ManagedClusterAddon API to add a field `DeployOption` to describe the deploy option(mode) of the addon.

Reviewer 2: I think the field would go well in the spec, it seems similar to the `installNamespace` that is already there.

makes the addon framework support running addons agents outside of the managed cluster, which is defined as `Hosted` 
mode deploy for addons agents.

### Goals

- Make addon-framework deploy addons agents outside of the managed cluster.
- Define how to deploy an addon in hosted mode

### Non-Goals

- Implementation details of addon
- Support deploying all addons in hosted mode. Not all addons can run in hosted mode(ex: an addon agent 
needs to analyze some managed cluster node related information, which can only be collected in the managed cluster and 
cannot be exposed outside the managed cluster).

## Proposal

We propose to define an annotation of the `ManagedClusterAddon` for addon deployers to indicate that the addon is 
deployed in hosted mode and where agents deployments will be deployed. And provide a label for addon developers to 
specify which manifests need to be deployed outside the managed cluster.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a managed cluster administrator, I hope as few as possible workloads running in my cluster while the addon 
functionality is not affected.

#### Story 2

> As a hub cluster administrator, on the premise that the addon functionality is not affected, I do not want the addon 

Author: fixed

### Terms

- `Hosted mode`: deploy addons agents deployments outside the managed cluster.
- `Hosting cluster`: The cluster where the addons agents deployments runn. A Hosting cluster is a managed cluster of 
the hub, which is to host the addon agent to manage another managed cluster's addon.
- `Addon deployer`: A person or a component responsible for deploying an addon.

### Constraints

There are several constraints:
- The managed cluster must be exposed to the hosting cluster
- The managed cluster(Klusterlet) must be imported to hub in `Hosted` mode
- The hosting cluster must be a managed cluster of the hub, hosting cluster should be managed by the hub
- The hosting cluster must be the same cluster where the managed cluster klusterlet(registration-agent & work-agent) 
runs
- After the addon is deployed, the deployment mode cannot be switched

## Design Details

### For addon developers

We propose to add a label `addon.open-cluster-management.io/hosted-manifest-location` for the addon agent manifests to 
mark which manifests should be deployed where in Hosted mode:
- No matter what the label's value is, all manifests will be deployed on the managed cluster in Default mode.

> - When the label does not exist: the manifest will be deployed on the managed cluster in Hosted mode

Reviewer 2: Could we also have a specific value like `managed` that does this? I think a developer could want to specify that they are deliberately placing something on the managed cluster. If the only way is to not specify a label, then it's not clear if the behavior is on purpose or not.

Author: Great point, I agree. @qiujian16 WDYT?

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a managed cluster administrator, I hope as few as possible workloads running in my cluster while the addon 
functionality is not affected.

#### Story 2

As a hub cluster administrator, on the premise that the addon functionality is not affected, I do not want the managed 
cluster to talk to the hub cluster directly.

### Terms

- `Hosted mode`: deploy addons agents deployments outside the managed cluster.
- `Hosting cluster`: The cluster where the addons agents deployments runn. A Hosting cluster is a managed cluster of 
the hub, which is to host the addon agent to manage another managed cluster's addon.
- `Addon deployer`: A person or a component responsible for deploying an addon.

### Constraints

There are several constraints:
- The managed cluster must be exposed to the hosting cluster
- The managed cluster(Klusterlet) must be imported to hub in `Hosted` mode
- The hosting cluster must be a managed cluster of the hub
- The hosting cluster of the addon must be the same hosting cluster of the klusterlet
- After the addon is deployed, the deployment mode cannot be switched

## Design Details

### For addon developers

> We propose to add a label `addon.open-cluster-management.io/hosted-manifest-location` for the addon agent manifests to 

Author: the value of each manifest if determined by the addon developer

mark which manifests should be deployed where in Hosted mode:
- No matter what the label's value is, all manifests will be deployed on the managed cluster in Default mode.

> 

Reviewer 3: The following content is related with PR: https://github.com/open-cluster-management-io/registration-operator/pull/253  @elgnay @zhujian7 @qiujian16 

---

Developers should at least add a namespace resource with the label `"addon.open-cluster-management.io/namespace": "true"` for addons' hosted mode manifests.

Because manifests in hosted mode could be installed in any namespace specified by `{ManagedClusterAddon.Spec.InstallNamespace}` which may not be created or synced with image pull secret.

Here is an example:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: {{ .Release.Namespace }}
  labels:
    addon.open-cluster-management.io/namespace: true

Author: Developers are required to ensure the existence of the addon agent namespace. if there is the label `"addon.open-cluster-management.io/namespace": "true"` on the namespace, the addon-framework will copy the image pull secret to the namespace, otherwise, developers need to provide the image pull secret themselves.

Reviewer 3: @zhujian7  Agree， clear and simple!

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can addon some context before?

---

If manifests will be deployed on the hosting cluster in Hosted mode,  then Developers are required to ensure the existence of the addon agent namespace(for example, add a namespace YAML file into manifests). 

And developers also should add the label "addon.open-cluster-management.io/namespace": "true" on the namespace, otherwise, addon-framework will not copy the image pull secret to the namespace and developers need to provide the image pull secret by themselves.

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Managed Cluster</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Managed Cluster</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Hosting Cluster</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky"><span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal">nonexist | managed</span></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">CRD owned by the addon</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky"><span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal">hosting</span></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">deployment</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky"><span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal">none</span></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Y</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow"></td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### For addon deployers

Once the managed cluster is imported to the hub in `Hosted` mode, the addon deployers can choose to run addon in Hosted
mode or Default mode, By default the addon agent will run on the managed cluster(Default mode), the addon deployers can 

> add an annotation `addon.open-cluster-management.io/hosting-cluster-name` for `ManagedClusterAddon` so that the addon 

Author: please see https://github.com/open-cluster-management-io/enhancements/pull/65#discussion_r908216507

agent will be deployed on the certain hosting cluster(Hosted mode), the value of the annotation is the hosting cluster 
which should:
- be a managed cluster of the hub as well
- be the same cluster where the managed cluster klusterlet(registration-agent & work-agent) runs

#### How does the addon agent connect to the managed cluster?

Addon agents deployments will be deployed in the `{ManagedClusterAddon.Spec.InstallNamespace}` namespeace, and the 
addon deployer is required to provide a secret, which name is `{addon-name}-managed-kubeconfig` and contains the key 
`kubeconfig` to connect to the managed cluster, in the `{ManagedClusterAddon.Spec.InstallNamespace}` namespace on the 
hosting cluster.

Some potential ways to provide the secret:
- The addon deployer asks the managed cluster administrator for a specific permission kubeconfig, then create it on the 
hosting cluster. Because the kubeconfig is generated by the managed cluster administrator, the addon developer does not 

> need to deploy any service-account, role, rolebinding on the managed cluster, labels these resources 

Reviewer 4: Did you mean this?
```suggestion
need to deploy any service-account, role, or rolebinding on the managed cluster. These resources would be labeled with 
```

`addon.open-cluster-management.io/hosted-manifest-location: none`

> - The addon developer deploys service-account, role, rolebinding on the managed cluster,labels these resources 

Author: Sorry, this may be confusing. I mean once the addon developer adds the label addon.open-cluster-management.io/hosted-manifest-location: managed or keeps the label non-exist, the addon-framework will deploy the resource to the managed cluster.
